Much information pertaining to the executive branch in our national government applies to the executive branches of the states and communities. Since the bi­cameral legislature and executive checks and balances in the national Constitution copied the government form of the states and municipal governments at the time, this should not be surprising. The Massachusetts' constitution written in 1780 served as a model for the federal constitution of 1787. More importantly, English city government followed the same pattern beginning hundreds of years earlier.

The generalization that governors are similar to the president is of limited utility because the powers of the governors differ from one state to another. Different powers given to state governors allow us to inquire whether they affect the actions that are taken by the states. The governor, as the top official of the execu­tive branch of state government, is expected to provide leadership in solving social problems. We also expect this of the president at the national level. Besides providing leadership, governors are supposed to be representative of and responsive to the public. Ameri­cans have not always had such high expectations of our governors.

Ambivalence Toward The Executive.

American ideas about state government's executive branch, and the governor in particular, have ranged widely over our history. Americans initially viewed the governor with outright hostility, given their experiences with the king's governor. Ten of the original 13 states initially had a single-year term for their governors, be­lieving that they could quickly remove those who acted irresponsibly. 1 At present, the executive is expected to provide policy leadership. We expect governors to be "vigorous, incisive, and thoroughly trained leaders. " This change has been caused by the competition of states in a very complex world economy as well as by the problems, such as crime and urban decay, inherent in the concentration of people in metropolitan areas.
 
As we initially noted in Chapter 9, representation was primarily expected of only the legislature. Before the declaration of independence, the king of England had appointed the governor. His lack of account­ability had led the colonies to demand powers for the representative legislative branch. Similar demands for powers for the legislative branch had long existed in England. When they threw off the influence of the king's governor, most states simply weakened the office of governor to the point of being irrelevant. Several state constitutions, including Massachusetts's 1780 constitution, however, used the office to offset what was seen as a too-powerful legislature, representative though it might have been. This concept, of course, is the basis of "checks and balances." 
Andrew Jackson's idea that the president should also be a representative of the public, along with the grow­ing role of the public in selecting the president, influ­enced thinking among the states about governors.3 His perspective on presidential politics included the idea that "to the victor belonged the spoils" of government. In the resulting spoils system, the winning president or governor appointed supporters to all available govern­mental offices, as a reward for their support in winning the election. With a turnover in the executive branch, supporters of the new officeholder would replace all previous government workers.

Although some were entirely satisfied with this situation, the "better elements" of society sought to reform the executive branch to make "merit" the basis of public employment. We have already discussed this concept in Chapter 4. At any rate, powers were taken from the executive branch. The Southern states cer­tainly supported this trend, given their experience with Reconstruction era "carpetbagger" governors. Ideas at this time called for a governor who could check the legislative branch but was otherwise weak. Until states experienced the need to use government to cope with the new problems of industrialization, it mattered little whether the governor was weak or strong.
 
The situation changed as states faced the need to address problems such as crime, regulation of business and industry, the inequitable distribution of wealth in local school districts, and other problems that come with contemporary economies and urban life. Legisla­tures tend to be reactive rather than proactive institu­tions. They rarely are venues of creativity. Instead, they most of ten deliberate ideas that originate elsewhere. The office of the governor was well positioned to coor­dinate the substantive knowledge of executive branch bureaucrats and draft proposals for problem-solving legislation. Executive leadership from the governor thus became urgent in our expectations. "Good-time Charlies" could no longer be tolerated as governors.4 

The Modern Governor.
 
The institutional powers of governors vary across the states largely because of the different feelings toward the office noted above. Powers derived from the state constitutions include length of term, veto powers, fragmentation of the state executive and appointive powers for lesser offices, and budget-making powers. Some governors have strong powers and thus might be expected to have more influence on what their state does, whether for good or for bad.

Pop.
