Chapter Heading: The executive branch of state governments.

Much information pertaining to the executive branch in our national government applies to the executive branches of the states and communities. Since the bi­cameral legislature and executive checks and balances in the national Constitution copied the government form of the states and municipal governments at the time, this should not be surprising. The Massachusetts' constitution written in 1780 served as a model for the federal constitution of 1787. More importantly, English city government followed the same pattern beginning hundreds of years earlier.

The generalization that governors are similar to the president is of limited utility because the powers of the governors differ from one state to another. Different powers given to state governors allow us to inquire whether they affect the actions that are taken by the states. The governor, as the top official of the execu­tive branch of state government, is expected to provide leadership in solving social problems. We also expect this of the president at the national level. Besides providing leadership, governors are supposed to be representative of and responsive to the public. Ameri­cans have not always had such high expectations of our governors.

Heading: Ambivalence toward the executive.

American ideas about state government's executive branch, and the governor in particular, have ranged widely over our history. Americans initially viewed the governor with outright hostility, given their experiences with the king's governor. Ten of the original 13 states initially had a single-year term for their governors, be­lieving that they could quickly remove those who acted irresponsibly. 1 At present, the executive is expected to provide policy leadership. We expect governors to be "vigorous, incisive, and thoroughly trained leaders. " This change has been caused by the competition of states in a very complex world economy as well as by the problems, such as crime and urban decay, inherent in the concentration of people in metropolitan areas.

As we initially noted in Chapter 9, representation was primarily expected of only the legislature. Before the declaration of independence, the king of England had appointed the governor. His lack of account­ability had led the colonies to demand powers for the representative legislative branch. Similar demands for powers for the legislative branch had long existed in England. When they threw off the influence of the king's governor, most states simply weakened the office of governor to the point of being irrelevant. Several state constitutions, including Massachusetts's 1780 constitution, however, used the office to offset what was seen as a too-powerful legislature, representative though it might have been. This concept, of course, is the basis of "checks and balances." 

Andrew Jackson's idea that the president should also be a representative of the public, along with the grow­ing role of the public in selecting the president, influ­enced thinking among the states about governors.3 His perspective on presidential politics included the idea that "to the victor belonged the spoils" of government. In the resulting spoils system, the winning president or governor appointed supporters to all available govern­mental offices, as a reward for their support in winning the election. With a turnover in the executive branch, supporters of the new officeholder would replace all previous government workers.

Although some were entirely satisfied with this situation, the "better elements" of society sought to reform the executive branch to make "merit" the basis of public employment. We have already discussed this concept in Chapter 4. At any rate, powers were taken from the executive branch. The Southern states cer­tainly supported this trend, given their experience with Reconstruction era "carpetbagger" governors. Ideas at this time called for a governor who could check the legislative branch but was otherwise weak. Until states experienced the need to use government to cope with the new problems of industrialization, it mattered little whether the governor was weak or strong.

The situation changed as states faced the need to address problems such as crime, regulation of business and industry, the inequitable distribution of wealth in local school districts, and other problems that come with contemporary economies and urban life. Legisla­tures tend to be reactive rather than proactive institu­tions. They rarely are venues of creativity. Instead, they most of ten deliberate ideas that originate elsewhere. The office of the governor was well positioned to coor­dinate the substantive knowledge of executive branch bureaucrats and draft proposals for problem-solving legislation. Executive leadership from the governor thus became urgent in our expectations. "Good-time Charlies" could no longer be tolerated as governors.4 

Heading: The modern governor.

The institutional powers of governors vary across the states largely because of the different feelings toward the office noted above. Powers derived from the state constitutions include length of term, veto powers, fragmentation of the state executive and appointive powers for lesser offices, and budget-making powers. Some governors have strong powers and thus might be expected to have more influence on what their state does, whether for good or for bad. 

Sub-Heading: Term of office.

At the low point in recent gubernatorial powers, most governors were elected for two-year terms. So were members of lower legislative chambers in most states. These short terms encouraged responsiveness and representativeness. With only two years between elec­tions, representatives must always be aware that the voters may defeat them for failing to act as the voters prefer. At least this was the argument for such short terms. Some states, such as Alabama, when George Wallace was governor, would not even allow a governor to serve consecutive two-year terms. Wallace sought unsuccessfully to avoid this by having his wife win the governorship for the next two-year term, presumably to be followed by George Wallace the term after that. 

Short terms handicap governors seeking to change state policies. Legislators and bureaucrats could simply stall until the next election when someone else would win office. Longer terms would seem to strengthen the governor's opportunity to influence policy. A four-year gubernatorial term has become the norm. Since 1955, nineteen states have switched from two to four year gubernatorial terms. 5 Only two states now re­tain a two-year gubernatorial term: New Hampshire and Vermont. Neither limits the number of such terms.

There are differences in how many terms the gov­ernor may serve. Fourteen states impose no limits whatsoever. Eight states have an absolute limit of two terms. Twenty-three states require that a governor leave after two terms for a 4-year period and may then return. Four states limit service to 8 or 12 of 16 years, and Virginia allows a 4-year term and then 4 years off.

Since limits have been placed on legislative terms only recently, governors with limits on the number of their terms would seem weaker with regard to dealing with the legislature. 7 In states with no limits, a gover­nor theoretically might be continually reelected and make a career as governor of that state. In actuality, however, few governors serve more than 8 years. Rick Perry of Texas became governor in 2000 when Gover­nor George W. Bush became President. Governor Perry was reelected in 2002, 2006 and 2010. He will have served 15 consecutive years when his current term of office ends in 2015. 

Sub-Heading: Veto powers.

As previously noted, a bill passed by a state legislature does not become law if it is rejected by the governor. Governors disallow bills by exercising veto power. Gov­ernors typically make statements about why they are declining bills in their veto messages. All state gover­nors now have the power to veto bills in their entirety. The president also has such a power, but many gover­nors have an even more flexible power, the item veto. All but six states give their governor the power to veto portions of a bill while allowing the remainder to become law. 8 Typically, item vetoes are limited to ap­propriation bills. With this power, the governor need not negotiate minute details with the legislature to get a budget passed. He or she can item veto those budget items not desired. Sometimes the governor can merely reduce the money given to an agency or program. As we have seen, legislatures can override gubernatorial vetoes but seldom do. Governors without item veto power are less able to influence legislation. As noted in Chapter 9, vetoes and veto overrides are uncommon. In the 2011, 2012 sessions of the state legislatures, just over 4 percent of the enacted bills were vetoed. However, only r6 legislatures had more than ro bills vetoed. 10 In previous legislation sessions, governors' vetoes were rarely overridden, typically around 15%.

Sub-Heading: Fragmentation of the state executive. 

The president and vice president of the United States are the only nationally elected executives. The presi­dent appoints all other executives, such as the secre­taries of state and defense, with the approval of the Senate. They are the president's assistants and may be asked to resign for "personal reasons," ifthe president asks. The governor of New Jersey is the only state chief executive who appoints all other top executives. Most governors share power in the executive branch with many others, some of them also selected in statewide elections.

The position of lieutenant governor exists in 45 states. In West Virginia, the President of the Senate is also the lieutenant governor. The other 44 state choose lieutenant governors by election. Governors and lieutenant governors are elected as a team and will be from the same party in 26 states. Elections for lieutenant governor in r8 states are inde­pendent of elections for governor, and it is possible for governors and lieutenant governors to be from differ­ent parties. Fortunately for governors, most lieutenant gover­nors are like the vice president. They exercise few pow­ers and wait in the wings in case the governor has to be replaced.

All states have the office of attorney general, but gov­ernors appoint attorneys general in only 5 states. The governor appoints the secretary of state in only 8 of 46 states that have the office. The large majority of these two executive of ficials must seek their own reelection and owe their election success to their own efforts rather than to anything done by the governor. Gover­nors seeking their cooperation cannot threaten to fire ficeholders.13 

Sub-Heading: Appointive powers.

When executive offices are not elected, of ten the governor can appoint them. For many positions, state senates must consent to appointments. This arrange­ment is not unlike the president's appointments of  cabinet members, but there is an important differ­ence. Presidents name all cabinet members at the time they take office. Many states have important agencies governed by appointed boards rather than individuals. Board members serve staggered terms. As a result, new governors can name only a minority of board members at the time they take office.

Control by the new governor does not occur shortly after he or she takes office. Appointed boards may not have a majority of members named by new governors until more than halfWay through the governors' first terms in office. In Texas, most appointed boards have 9 members and governors appoint only 3 every two years. When it was written, the Texas Constitution gave governors a two-year term of office. A governor would have to win three consecutive elections to appoint all board mem­bers. Subsequently, the term of office was amended to four years and, as noted earlier Governor Rick Perry will have served 15 consecutive years at the end of his current term of office. He has appointed all members of all boards for at least two membership cycles. The authors of the Texas Constitution did not contemplate this would ever occur.

Sometimes agency heads are not appointed but rise through civil service, again owing nothing to the gov­ernor. Governors with more appointments should have more resources for making public policy. Some states do not have positions that commonly exist in most states. For example, many states lack a comptroller. This would seem to neither help nor hurt the governor.

Sub-Heading: Budget-making powers. 

A budget can enormously influence what the state does. Those who control the budget or purse strings  may win them little support at the polls when they seek them. And their cooperation with a successful governor control policy. A policy with no funding for enforcement or implementation is empty, and governors differ to be reelected. Finally, the federal courts have even in their influence on budgets. Governors in Texas and South Carolina, for example, cannot independently develop both their own revenue estimates and expendi­tures proposals. In other states, governors have access to information not available to the legislatures. This advantage strengthens the governor's hand. Further­more, they have the opportunity to submit to state legislatures comprehensive proposals for revenues and expenditures. Legislatures are inclined to consider only relatively small adjustments to these proposals.